---
id: 2026-05-27-how-you-can-save-money-on-your-energy-bill
title: How you can save money on your energy bill
source: bbc.com
url: 'https://www.bbc.com/news/articles/cwy2e3wx7xwo?at_medium=RSS&at_campaign=rss'
date: '2026-05-27'
topics:
  - business
  - economy
type: full-text
---
15 hours agoKevin PeacheyCost of living correspondentGetty ImagesDuring a heatwave the last thing you'll be thinking about is your heating and energy bill.But energy prices will rise in July and analysts predict bills – driven by the increase in the cost of gas – are likely to remain elevated into the winter.Experts say action now can save money when the pinch comes, even though people may feel they have already made every saving possible.Consider fixed deal – but be aware of the risk should prices fallSome 22 million people - about 40% of billpayers - have the certainty of fixed tariffs. In these deals, the cost per unit does not change for the term of the tariff, which is usually a year. The total bill still depends on the amount of energy used.Options on the market are cheaper than the price cap level. However, if international events do change and prices fall sharply, savings might not be so clear-cut.Look at how you pay – monthly is cheaper than quarterlyReceiving your bill every quarter, rather paying a monthly direct debit, is typically about £140 a year more expensive, says regulator Ofgem.There are still about seven million of these so-called standard credit accounts. Although some people like the quarterly payment of bills, it is a more expensive option.Getty ImagesTake a fresh look at habits and energy saving measuresThe record-breaking May heatwave is not necessarily the time you think about getting your home winter-ready.But experts say it is the perfect time to check if you can do more to block draughts, change cooking habits, bleed radiators and generally be more energy efficient.Short shower times can also make a difference, albeit small. There are egg timers and even four-minute songs that can keep time for you.Check whether you are eligible for grantsMillions of pounds goes unclaimed in the benefits system. Pension credit, in particular, is underclaimed and yet it can help older people with financial support as a gateway to other benefits.Grants for energy efficiency improvements may also available through schemes organised by local councils. Eligibility criteria, such as income and location, varies. Charities such as Citizens Advice can help people see if they can get assistance.Tackle existing energy debt; suppliers may offer reliefCollectively people owe £4.5bn in unpaid bills and charges.Suppliers say they may write off some of that debt, provide payment plans, or help with the cost of white goods - but only if you tell them you're in trouble.
