---
id: 2026-05-24-at-least-14-killed-in-bombing-attack-that-derailed
title: At Least 14 Killed in Bombing Attack That Derailed a Train in Pakistan
source: nytimes.com
url: >-
  https://www.nytimes.com/2026/05/24/world/asia/pakistan-train-bomb-attack-derailment.html
date: '2026-05-24'
topics:
  - world
  - US
type: full-text
---
AdvertisementSKIP ADVERTISEMENTYou have a preview view of this article while we are checking your access. When we have confirmed access, the full article content will load.The explosion was so powerful that several nearby buildings were damaged and a resident 15 miles away was jolted awake by the blast. A separatist group claimed responsibility.A Pakistani soldier aiming his weapon after an explosion struck a passenger train in Quetta, Pakistan, on Sunday.Credit...Banaras Khan/Agence France-Presse — Getty ImagesMay 24, 2026At least 14 people were killed on Sunday after a bomb exploded near a passenger train in southwestern Pakistan, local officials said, in the latest outbreak of violence in a region gripped by a long-running separatist insurgency.The explosion happened around 8 a.m. local time near a railway crossing in Balochistan Province, close to Pakistan’s border with Afghanistan. The area is home to numerous militant groups that have grown increasingly violent in recent years.The bomb went off as a shuttle train carrying dozens of passengers, some from a nearby military base, was on its way to the main railway station in Quetta, the provincial capital, officials said. The blast was so powerful that it derailed the locomotive and at least three coaches, with two carriages overturning, according to Pakistan’s railway minister, Muhammad Hanif Abbasi.Many of the passengers were most likely traveling to visit their families ahead of Eid al-Adha, which will be celebrated on Wednesday in Pakistan. The train would have connected with the Jaffer Express, a vital 1,000-mile rail link between Quetta and Pakistan’s major cities.Shahid Rind, an official with the provincial government in Balochistan, said officials had so far confirmed at least 14 deaths in the attack. A police officer and a health department official in Quetta, who spoke on the condition of anonymity because they were not authorized to discuss the attack publicly, said that more than 20 bodies, including those of women and children, had been brought to a hospital and that over three dozen others had been injured.Police officials and Mr. Rind said preliminary investigations had suggested that a suicide attacker might have carried out the bombing, although a bomb disposal squad had yet to release its final assessment.Thank you for your patience while we verify access. If you are in Reader mode please exit and log into your Times account, or subscribe for all of The Times.Thank you for your patience while we verify access.Already a subscriber? Log in.Want all of The Times? Subscribe.Related ContentAdvertisementSKIP ADVERTISEMENT
