---
id: 2026-05-31-australia-news-live-marles-predicts-significant-au
title: >-
  Australia news live: Marles predicts ‘significant’ Aukus savings through new
  plan to buy only second-hand US subs
source: theguardian.com
url: >-
  https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/live/2026/may/31/clare-oneil-labor-tax-changes-richard-marles-shangri-la-dialogue-aukus-deal-politics-reactions-labor-coalition-tax-changes-housing-one-nation-ntwnfb
date: '2026-05-31'
topics:
  - world
  - news
type: full-text
---
Marles predicts ‘significant’ Aukus savings from buying only secondhand subsAustralia’s defence minister, Richard Marles, has said Australia is saving money and simplifying its navy by taking old US subs instead of a new one.Marles and his counterparts have agreed Australia won’t take a new Virginia-class submarine from the US as previously planned, with all three ships now to be secondhand.Speaking in Singapore this morning, Marles said that option had always been considered and he was “really pleased” it had been adopted. He said:
 double quotation markIn the context of a very complicated endeavour, we need to place a premium on simplicity.
Marles said the former plan would have had the Australian navy operating up to four classes of submarine at once: the existing Collins class, the secondhand Virginia, the new Virginia model and the SSN Aukus, to come in the 2030s.
 double quotation markThat gets pretty complicated in terms of how you’re operating a fleet of submarines. What we will have here is a much simpler pathway. It will mean that the Virginia-class submarines that we are acquiring will all be of the same type.
He said the secondhand models were “cost-effective”, asked if Australia was saving money.
 double quotation markThere is the purchase price in respect of each of the submarines and this will be more cost-effective in relation to that and it’ll be significant …
 It is definitely cost-effective. And to be clear, you know, this is a very expensive program, obviously. And so we are trying to find every cost-effective option as we walk down this path.
Richard Marles speaks to journalists in Singapore. Photograph: Achmad Ibrahim/APKey events37m agoMarles predicts ‘significant’ Aukus savings from buying only secondhand subs2h agoLabor wants capital gains tax problems ‘resolved speedily’3h agoAustralia to get no new, only old, Virginia-class submarines under Aukus3h agoPauline Hanson says she could be prime minister3h agoHanson backs Taylor’s tax indexation plan3h agoAukus nations to develop payloads for uncrewed undersea vehicles3h agoGood morningShow key events onlyPlease turn on JavaScript to use this featureMarles backs US claim power must underpin global orderAustralia’s defence minister has endorsed the US secretary of defence, Pete Hegseth, in his claim power must underpin the global rules-based order.Hegseth yesterday spoke to defence counterparts in a private meeting. In public comments, Hegseth warned the Trump administration’s record defence budget request – US$1.5tn (A$2.085tn) – would “unleash America’s arsenal of freedom and expand America’s military dominance for decades to come”.Richard Marles, from Australia, reflected on Hegseth’s comments today, speaking to reporters in Singapore, adding that smaller countries like Australia need the rules-based order.Australia, the US and UK agreed to deploy new technology to defend undersea cables, while Australia, the UK and 15 other countries signed on to a new agreement to coordinate the defence of underwater infrastructure.Marles told reporters:
 double quotation markThis is a collective challenge and it demands a collective response, which is actually what the rules-based order is all about.
 And I think more generally, at times now, it feels as though talking about rules is unfashionable. I think this is an example of why rules are just as important today, if not more important today than they have ever been.
 And we also very much understand that there is a connection between rules and power. The rules-based order needs to be underpinned by power, a point that Secretary Hegseth made yesterday. We completely understand that and completely agree with that.
 But it’s important that we are all, in the context of a power underwriting of this, we are all committed to a rules-based system, because that is actually what gives middle powers, like Australia or smaller countries, agency.
Richard Marles speaks to journalists in Singapore. Photograph: Jam Sta Rosa/AFP/Getty ImagesMarles won’t blame China for undersea cable damageRichard Marles has avoided directly blaming China for damage to undersea cables.The defence minister said yesterday the cables, key to Australia’s internet connection, were being cut at an unprecedented rate. China has been blamed for numerous attacks on the cables.Marles spoke to reporters in Singapore this morning. Asked about Australia’s evidence the attacks were related, Marles said:
 double quotation markLet’s assume what we’re talking about is accidents … what this is demonstrating is the fragility, if you like, of what is now critical global infrastructure. I mean, if it is possible for an anchor to cut a cable in the middle of the night by accident, that of itself ought to be a concern.
 But if there is any intention in respect of this, that requires our attention as well.
Marles declined to share more detail when asked if Australia had identified any actors behind the damage:
 double quotation markI’m not going to go further than what I’ve just said in my answer and what I said in my speech yesterday. This is a really important domain and it’s one that all of us need to work hard on.
Marles predicts ‘significant’ Aukus savings from buying only secondhand subsAustralia’s defence minister, Richard Marles, has said Australia is saving money and simplifying its navy by taking old US subs instead of a new one.Marles and his counterparts have agreed Australia won’t take a new Virginia-class submarine from the US as previously planned, with all three ships now to be secondhand.Speaking in Singapore this morning, Marles said that option had always been considered and he was “really pleased” it had been adopted. He said:
 double quotation markIn the context of a very complicated endeavour, we need to place a premium on simplicity.
Marles said the former plan would have had the Australian navy operating up to four classes of submarine at once: the existing Collins class, the secondhand Virginia, the new Virginia model and the SSN Aukus, to come in the 2030s.
 double quotation markThat gets pretty complicated in terms of how you’re operating a fleet of submarines. What we will have here is a much simpler pathway. It will mean that the Virginia-class submarines that we are acquiring will all be of the same type.
He said the secondhand models were “cost-effective”, asked if Australia was saving money.
 double quotation markThere is the purchase price in respect of each of the submarines and this will be more cost-effective in relation to that and it’ll be significant …
 It is definitely cost-effective. And to be clear, you know, this is a very expensive program, obviously. And so we are trying to find every cost-effective option as we walk down this path.
Richard Marles speaks to journalists in Singapore. Photograph: Achmad Ibrahim/APBen DohertyIsrael rejected flotilla allegations now subject to international criminal court submissionFor context on that Global Sumud Flotilla submission to the international criminal court: Israel’s ambassador to Australia, Hillel Newman, told the ABC’s 7.30 the flotilla participants were treated with “great sensitivity” and that “no one was hurt”. He rejected allegations of sexualised mistreatment and said claims of violence were “not true”.The Israeli Prison Service has said allegations of violence against flotilla participants were “false and entirely without factual basis”.Israel’s treatment of the humanitarian sailors onboard the flotilla attracted international condemnation when the country’s national security minister posted a video online showing him taunting and humiliating flotilla participants while they were zip-tied, and forced to kneel in stress positions, with the Israeli national anthem blared over loudspeakers.Itamar Ben-Gvir, the leader of the far-right, racist Otzma Yehudit party, mocked the bound human rights defenders, waving an Israeli flag and shouting “welcome to Israel, we are the landlords”.As those detained scream in pain, Ben-Gvir yells, “give them to us for the terrorists’ prisons”.Newman said Ben-Gvir’s humiliation of the human rights defenders had been “condemned by the government of Israel entirely”.
 double quotation markIt’s not acceptable, it’s disgraceful … it does not reflect our values … and therefore is condemned and declared disgraceful and harmful to the state.
The international criminal court (ICC) issued arrest warrants for Israel’s prime minister, Benjamin Netanyahu, and former defence minister Yoav Gallant in 2024 for alleged war crimes and crimes against humanity in Gaza.The warrants allege the two leaders used starvation as a method of warfare, as well as intentionally directing attacks against civilians, murder, persecution and other inhumane acts.Ben DohertyGaza flotilla activists submit torture allegations to international criminal courtAustralians who sailed on the Global Sumud Flotilla to bring aid to Gaza have joined an official submission to the international criminal court (ICC) detailing allegations of torture, sexual violence, beatings and other serious abuses during their detention by Israeli forces.The submission included testimonies from flotilla participants, medical examination documents and legal affidavits, gathered after the flotilla was intercepted and participants detained.The Global Samud Flotilla sailed from ports in the Mediterranean attempting to deliver food, medicine and baby formula to Gaza, where hunger is widespread and the medical system has been devastated by years of war. Those onboard the flotilla were civilians and unarmed.The Australian lawyer Bernadette Zaydan is a member of the legal team putting evidence before the court in The Hague.The submission to the ICC alleges war crimes, crimes against humanity, torture and other serious violations of international law arising from the interception and detention of flotilla participants during the Spring 2026 missions.A Global Sumud Flotilla boat with an Israeli military ship behind it, seen from Ashdod, southern Israel on 19 May. Photograph: Amir Cohen/ReutersBut Palestinian-Australian Subhi Awad, a spokesperson for the flotilla delegation, said the accounts of survivors defied the official narrative.
 double quotation markOur people were beaten. Our people were tortured. Our people suffered sexual violence. An Australian humanitarian was injected with an unknown substance.
 Who do Australians believe – Israeli officials, or Australian survivors? Who do Australians believe – the perpetrators, or the evidence?
Awad said the flotilla participants were being gaslit by accounts from the Israeli government.
 double quotation markTelling Australians they were treated with ‘great sensitivity’ is an insult to every survivor and every Australian watching.
Tom McIlroyRinehart ‘very disgruntled’ with the Liberals, Hanson saysThe One Nation leader, Pauline Hanson, has talked up the mining billionaire Gina Rinehart’s influence in Australian politics, and says she has become “disgruntled” with the Liberal party.Hanson said on Sky News this morning:
 double quotation markGina Rinehart has been supportive of my policies. Why? Because she can see that this is going to drive change in this nation.
 The Liberal party were lax. The Liberal party have become full of the moderates, who are, you know, this woke agenda – male, female rubbish that’s been pushed on to us.
 There’s no productivity, you know the division that’s happening.
Hanson says Rinehart is “a great Australian”.
 double quotation markHer voice is no different to anyone here … Anyone else here that has an opinion, or the farmer, whoever they are … Her voice is no different to anyone else’s.
Gina Rinehart. Photograph: Hollie Adams/ReutersHouse price downturn no problem for 5% deposit scheme buyers, O’Neil saysThe federal government says its 5% deposit scheme for first home buyers is “really robust”, as an expected house price slide raises the risk new homeowners could be left in negative equity.Buyers who borrowed a bigger loan under the scheme may be left with a debt worth more than their home they bought it with, if prices slide, raising the risk of defaulting on their loan.Labor’s housing minister, Clare O’Neil, said the 5% deposit scheme was holding up well, when asked on the ABC’s Insiders whether she was worried.
 double quotation markOur government is incredibly proud of this program. We have now got 260,000 Australians into their own home with the support and backing of an Albanese government that saw their aspiration and helped them realise it. I don’t care what your politics is, this that is a massive number of people to have support.
 … This is a really robust scheme. Defaults against this scheme are vanishingly small and, in fact, [the Commonwealth Bank] said pretty recently, the average 5% deposit holder is actually more ahead on their mortgage than the average mortgage holder in this country.
 What does that tell us? It tells us that when ambitious young people who are trying to build wealth for themselves and their family get the opportunity of a government to back them in, they will do the right thing.
Labor says tax changes not main driver of impending house price fallAustralian house prices are expected to slide, if only briefly, but the federal housing minister has avoided taking the blame (or the credit).Clare O’Neil has said interest rates are the main influence on the speed of price growth, when asked on Insiders about projections house prices could fall up to 10% from their peak before steadying and rising again. She said:
 double quotation markThe tax changes we are making in the budget are not the main driver of that.
 House prices in our country move. The biggest driver of them is what goes on with interest rates.
 Treasury has modelled the impact of our tax changes on house prices. There is a mild affordability impact. For that, we get 75,000 rental households into their own home and a fairer market for housing in this country forever. So it’s about a 2% slowing of growth that Treasury has predicted, and indeed it’s not just Treasury.
 If you look at the Grattan model they have built – they’re very reliable voices on this – their estimates are the same, same with the Commonwealth Bank of Australia …
Asked specifically if she thought housing prices would fall, O’Neil said:
 double quotation markI don’t get into a speculation about what happens with property prices in this country.
There have been projections house prices could fall up to 10% from their peak before steadying and rising again. Photograph: Russell Freeman/AAPExtra negative gearing limits could hurt market and family budgets, Labor saysClare O’Neil has rejected calls from the Greens and others to put further limits on negative gearing access, saying the government should not interrupt “immediate arrangements”.The federal budget restricted negative gearing access for any new property investments in newly built properties, leaving it in place for existing landlords.The Greens have said they will use a hurried Senate inquiry into Labor’s tax reform proposals to advocate for limits on investor tax breaks to go further.O’Neil, the housing minister, has just told the ABC’s Insiders:
 double quotation markThere’s people in the debate who want to see the government go further. I really understand that but I just think we need to step back.
 Negative gearing is a very immediate impact on a household and family budget and it’s not something that governments, when they’re making tax changes, should do, to interrupt people’s immediate arrangements.
 But we also don’t want to create significant disruptions in the housing market …
 The policy reason is that governments shouldn’t make dramatic tax changes to systems and affect people’s day-to-day management of their household budgets.
Labor wants capital gains tax problems ‘resolved speedily’Clare O’Neil says the Albanese government wants to work quickly to iron out the issues in its plan to reform taxes on capital gains.The Labor frontbencher has just told Insiders:
 double quotation markWe need to land this. We’ll do that in the appropriate time given the need … This is not a political timeline. It is a policy timeline … It’s important this gets resolved speedily and that’s what the government is working towards.
Earlier, O’Neil said the changes would make Australia’s tax settings more neutral across types of investment, while keeping concessions for small businesses to reduce the tax they pay on capital gains.Businesses and investors have lashed out at the design, with startups especially worried they could lose almost all of their tax discount.O’Neil said some of the criticism was “completely out of proportion” but acknowledged there were design problems to resolve. She declined to discuss the fixes under consideration or detail a timeline for the government’s consultation of businesses.
 double quotation markI think there’s a range of things that are on the table in those conversations and I won’t speak about them in detail …
 The government wants to get the right outcome here and we are not going to be driven by the politics of the moment. It’s really important we reach the right landing point for this and I think I have spoken in previous interviews this week about some of the issues we see.
 For example, where businesses start with a cost base of zero, the new model of CGT calculation isn’t perfect for that kind of model of the economics of a small business that starts with no cost base and grows really quickly.
Clare O’Neil at the National Press Club in Canberra last week. Photograph: Mick Tsikas/AAPHousing minister denies supply efforts will fall shortThe Albanese government has rejected warnings it has overestimated the effect of its new infrastructure spending on housing supply.Some industry groups have warned the government’s $2bn spending on new infrastructure, announced in the budget, may not meaningfully increase the number of new homes completed each year.The housing minister, Clare O’Neil, has dismissed those claims, speaking on the ABC’s Insiders. Asked to guarantee completion rates for housing would not fall under the weight of new taxes, O’Neil said:
 double quotation markThere’s a lot that goes into completion rates. What I can tell you is that government policy is going to lift those numbers by 420,000, based off what they would otherwise be. That’s what the Treasury modelling tells us.
The Treasury secretary, Jenny Wilkinson, separately this week said the budget’s broader tax changes were focused on changing the distribution of housing, and less targeted at increasing housing supply.O’Neil did not directly answer when asked whether Wilkinson was correct.Tom McIlroyHanson stands by no ‘good Muslims’ commentsPauline Hanson has doubled down on her inflammatory comments about Islam, defending her plans to restrict migration and suggesting that there are no “good Muslims”.
 double quotation markWhen I look at countries like Britain or Canada or Germany or France, they got a hell of a problem over there, so I stick with what I said.
On banning migration from majority Islamic countries, the One Nation leader says people with radical ideology are not compatible with Australia’s way of life.
 double quotation markSo, there’s certain countries I probably would ban them coming into Australia.
Australia to get no new, only old, Virginia-class submarines under AukusAustralia will no longer receive any new Virginia-class submarines from the US, with all three of the Aukus vessels to be secondhand.The defence minister, Richard Marles, welcomed the new proposal alongside his US and UK counterparts yesterday.Australia had been expecting to receive a mix of old and new Virginia-class submarines for its own use in the early 2030s as it prepares to adopt nuclear-powered submarines.Marles announced the plan had changed in a joint statement on Saturday. It read:
 double quotation markThe Deputy Prime Minister and Secretaries welcomed the proposed approach to streamline Australia’s acquisition of Virginia-class submarines (VCS), simplifying supply chain management, operational and maintenance requirements, and maximising cost efficiencies.
 This approach would enable Australia to acquire three in-service VCS in lieu of a mixture of new and in-service VCS variants.
US shipyards have been under pressure as they struggle to boost manufacturing to their goal of building an average of 2.3 new submarines a year by 2032.Richard Marles speaks in Singapore as British defence secretary John Healey (left) and US secretary of defence Pete Hegseth look on. Photograph: Edgar Su/ReutersYou can read more about Marles’ speech here:Pauline Hanson says she could be prime ministerTom McIlroyPauline Hanson tells Sky News she is actively considering moving to the lower house at the next election and that she could do the job of prime minister.Hanson says a move back to the lower house, where she was first elected in 1996, is “a consideration by all means”.One Nation have been surging in opinion polls, and is attracting support of more than 20%. The next election is expected in early 2028.“But I am not making a decision now and I’m not going to tell anyone what I’m doing at this moment, because I haven’t clearly made up my mind,” Hanson said.Asked if she wants to become prime minister, Hanson says she “won’t knock the job”.
 double quotation markI believe that I have the ability to do it. I’m not going to underestimate myself or say ‘no, I can’t do it’, because, you know, have a look at what we’ve got now, really, honestly, and that’s why we’re in a mess.
Hanson backs Taylor’s tax indexation planTom McIlroyThe One Nation leader, Pauline Hanson, has supported Angus Taylor’s plans to index Australia’s tax thresholds, telling Sky News “they just keep moving all the time”.Hanson says she wants to have a look at tax policy ahead of the next election, proposing an “overhaul” to “make it a fairer system”.
 double quotation markThose people who work overtime do their 40 hours a week or 38 hours a week, they’re working overtime, they’re taxed to the hilt, and I think we need to overhaul the whole taxation system.
Taylor’s plan is designed to combat bracket creep, and will cost at least $22.5bn.Hanson says she is not across the detail of Labor’s plans on negative gearing, capital gains tax and trusts, admitting she has been campaigning this week. Labor has already introduced the legislation for the budget changes.Hanson says she’s concerned the government is including tax cuts in the legislation, calling it “a ploy by the Labor party” to wedge the opposition and minor parties.Pauline Hanson with One Nation MPs after a press conference at Parliament House in Canberra. Photograph: Mick Tsikas/AAPContinuing that report from Agence France-Presse: the British defence secretary, John Healey, said that the planned technology, a “range of cutting edge sensors and weapons systems” for underseas drones, “will rapidly give our forces the very most advanced battlefield technologies”.The systems will be deployed on uncrewed underwater vessels, Healey added.The protection of underwater infrastructure has been a major topic of discussion at Asia’s premier annual defence summit in Singapore.“The seabed has become a major field of contest over the past 18 months,” Australia’s defence minister, Richard Marles, earlier told delegates.
 double quotation markWe have witnessed a series of attacks against subsea critical infrastructure at a scale and frequency that is historically unprecedented.
There have been several incidents in the past two years of seabed cables being damaged by ships, both in the Baltic and around the Asian region.Nearly all of Australia’s internet traffic flows through just 15 subsea cables, Marles pointed out.
 double quotation markOur ability to operate as a modern economy and a functioning state, all of it is critically dependent on infrastructure that is exposed, that cannot move.
 As we’ve now seen demonstrated in the Baltic, [it] can be cut with an anchor in the middle of the night.
You can read more about Marles’s warning here, from reporter Ben Doherty:Aukus nations to develop payloads for uncrewed undersea vehiclesThe US, Australia and Britain are developing hi-tech payloads for uncrewed underseas vehicles under their trilateral security partnership, the Pentagon chief, Pete Hegseth, announced on Saturday.As Agence France-Presse reports, Hegseth met his Australian and British counterparts on the sidelines of the Shangri-La Dialogue in Singapore, where they reviewed progress on the Aukus pact, aimed at bolstering their presence in the Indo-Pacific and beyond.“Today, we’re pleased to announce the first Aukus Pillar 2 signature project, focused on fielding advanced uncrewed undersea vehicles, or UUVs,” Hegseth told reporters at a briefing at the US embassy in Singapore.
 double quotation markThis signature project will deliver a suite of highly adaptable multi-mission UUV payloads designed to support undersea operations and maintain our collective advantage in the maritime domain.
Aukus’s Pillar 1 focuses on Australia’s acquisition of conventionally armed, nuclear-powered submarines, while Pillar 2 pools the talents of each nation’s defence sector to develop advanced military capabilities.The pact is framed as supporting a “free and open Indo-Pacific”, though it is widely viewed as a bulwark against a rising China, which strongly opposes it.Good morningHello, this is Luca Ittimani here, to take you through the day’s news as it unfolds on what is so far a sunny Sunday morning – in Sydney, at least.Richard Marles has told a Singapore defence summit the “seabed is a battlefield”, as a new Aukus project was announced to protect undersea cables.And Clare O’Neil will be speaking on the ABC’s Insiders program shortly, discussing Labor’s recent changes to the capital gains tax.We’ll have more coming up – say tuned.
