---
id: 2026-05-30-happy-either-way-arsenal-fans-find-zen-attitude-to
title: '‘Happy either way’: Arsenal fans find zen attitude to Champions League final'
source: theguardian.com
url: >-
  https://www.theguardian.com/football/2026/may/30/arsenal-fans-zen-like-champions-league-final-result
date: '2026-05-30'
topics:
  - world
  - news
type: full-text
---
The streets of Holloway, usually bustling with families and trolly-dragging shoppers, were uncharacteristically quiet on Saturday afternoon. But shortly after the clock struck 5pm, loud roars echoed through the north London high street, located a short walk away from the Emirates stadium, as Arsenal walked on to the pitch for the Champions League final.While the team, still basking in the glory of their Premier League win last week, were in Budapest for their final showdown against Paris Saint-Germain, Gunners – or Gooners, as they are colloquially known – came out to support the team on their home turf.A tweak to the Argos shop sign on the Holloway Road. Photograph: Sammy  Gecsoyler/The GuardianThe Argos sign on Holloway Road was fitted with a banner after the letter r to form the word Ar-senal and pubs in the area were heaving with fans clad in red and white. The tense silence was broken mere minutes later when Kai Havertz scored a goal barely five minutes into the game.Arsenal fans Lucy and Gregory.   Photograph: Sammy  Gecsoyler/The GuardianLucy, 37, and Gregory, 48, travelled from Paris to Holloway for the final, though sadly they couldn’t make it inside the Victoria Tavern pub to view the game, which was heaving with fans. “The mood is amazing,” said Lucy, who has been a Gooner for 30 years. “We went to the Emirates and there was lots of people.” She said she connected with the team because of its strong pedigree of French players including Thierry Henry and Patrick Vieira.Gregory wasn’t too hopeful that Arsenal could pull off a double win. “PSG is a good team,” he said. Lucy did not see it as a make-or-break result: “I will be happy either way but more happy if we win the Champions League.”Issac, 42, was also waiting outside the pub, with fleeting hope that he would make it inside. He had travelled to Holloway from Ghana to celebrate with other Gunners on home turf. “It was the best thing ever,” he said of Arsenal’s Premier League win, the first time the team had taken the trophy in 22 years. Like Lucy and Gregory, he was already delighted with what Arsenal had achieved this season. “I’ll be disappointed but we’ve got a Premier League win which is more important to me,” he said.Jack Davenport.   Photograph: Sammy  Gecsoyler/The GuardianMost pubs around the stadium were at full capacity and a short bus ride away in Angel Islington, Gooner fever was also in full swing. “Honestly, I’m a mix of nervous and excited,” said 25-year-old Jack Devonport about the final, who had travelled into the area to celebrate with his fellow Gunners. Though, like near the Emirates, most pubs were already packed.He has been a lifelong Gooner. “I’ve seen everything. I was alive for the last Champions League final but I don’t remember it. I’ve seen us losing to Birmingham in the cup finals. I’ve seen the 6-0 on the Chelsea game. I’ve seen all the negatives and finally it feels like we’re at the pinnacle,” he said.When Arsenal were declared victors of the Premier League for the first time in 22 years last week, Devonport said he felt “relief more than anything”.“The one thing I’ve learned about football is that it isn’t always fair. Sometimes you can be the best team with the best squad but luck doesn’t always go your way,” he said. “You don’t always get what you deserve in football but to finally get over the line is everything to me.”Arsenal’s smashing performance this season has meant more than mere personal satisfaction to Devonport. “The last time we won the league I was five years old so to be able to watch every game this season with my dad has been massive,” he said.“To watch all the games together, to relive what he had when he was younger with his son is amazing. It’s something we’ll never forget.”And the evening began well for Arsenal with Kai Havertz firing them into a sixth-minute lead. PSG, however, equalised courtesy of an Ousmane Dembélé penalty in the second half to force extra time and subsequently a penalty shootout.There was heartbreak in the end for the red half of north London with Eberechi Eze and Gabriel Magalhães missing their spot-kicks as the French side won 4-3 in the shootout to retain their Champions League crown.
