---
id: 2026-05-26-ferry-frustrations-and-housing-concerns-in-gorey
title: Ferry frustrations and housing concerns in Gorey
source: bbc.com
url: 'https://www.bbc.com/news/articles/c4g000d4l45o?at_medium=RSS&at_campaign=rss'
date: '2026-05-26'
topics:
  - business
  - economy
type: full-text
---
18 hours agoAmmar EbrahimJersey political reporter BBCBBC Jersey's election roadshow went to Grouville and St Martin on TuesdayAhead of Jersey's 2026 general election, the BBC is going to each voting district to speak to islanders about the issues affecting and concerning them.Tuesday saw Grouville and St Martin residents talking about their concerns.A business owner in Gorey has told the BBC that the cost of eggs she bought had more than doubled over the last three years. Another resident in Grouville said she was worried she would have to leave Jersey because of the cost of housing.Café Louise owner Tracey Benn says the new freight pricing model has meant key ingredients are more expensiveTracey Benn, who owns Café Louise in Gorey harbour, said the flat rate of freight which was brought in with the new ferry contract had increased her costs.The flat rate means every freight providers pays the same per meter of space they take up on ships for the goods they bring in.Previously, providers bringing in more volume would get a better deal.Tracey said: "I don't know if it's made it competitive. "I mean, if I had to put my prices up in the café like any other business in relation to what our wholesale prices have gone up, I wouldn't have any customers."We're having to absorb these and just, you know, suck it and see what's going to happen."When I took over the business three years ago, I was paying £3.60 for a tray of eggs. I use an awful lot of eggs. I'm now paying, three years down the line, £7.90 for a tray of eggs."Bacon was £29. I'm now paying £39 a case. "My coffee beans - I used a particular bean and the business had used that bean for almost 20 years - overnight, the price of a case went up by £80."Elaine Davis says ferry issues are leading to more expensive goodsElaine Davis, who lives in St Martin, also said ferries had added to cost of living challenges.She said: "Well, I've got family visiting from London and they notice how expensive it is, just buying groceries and things. "You just notice that little extra bit of cost on everything - that maybe comes from the transport, but don't get me started on DFDS and the new contract because that's not good."I really wish we hadn't changed from Condor. We travel a lot to the UK and the continent, and I feel it's a step backwords."The BBC has approached DFDS and the Government of Jersey for comment.Debbie Krupski describes Gorey as "wonderful" but is worried she will have to leave the island because of the cost of livingThe BBC also spoke to 47-year-old Debbie Krupski, who described Gorey "as the most wonderful place", but said she was worried about the affordability of housing.She said: "Life is great here - as long as you are based here."If you're looking to come in, it's very challenging unless you have a huge amount of money to spend and you can really invest in a massive property here."[If not,] then it's tricky for you, so I'd say affordability... is an island-wide thing."The reality for me is that, unless there is some miracle-changing event, I won't be able to stay here. There is no way I can afford it."I will have to leave at some point, which is very sad. I don't want to, I want to be part of this community in the long-term, but it simply isn't viable as a retirement for me."Debbie said she felt that Jersey had huge potential to bring about change.She said: "You have some incredible people here and, if you could just harness that, we really do have autonomy and the agency and the agility to make big changes."I do believe we have the vision, but is that vision in the right places? Is it in the places of influence and change?"The election will take place on Sunday 7 June and the list of candidates standing for deputy in Grouville and St Martin can be found here.
